---
layout: post
title: "Ginsberg's Howl: A successful challenge of the status quo?"
date: 2020-05-27
tags: poetry writing
---

### "Society does not consist of individuals but expresses the sum of interrelations, the relations within which these individuals stand." - Karl Marx.

# To what extent does Ginsberg create an individual voice which successfully challenges the status quo?

In Ginsberg's Howl, the poet draws on the philosophy of Marx in his depiction of postwar American society expressing the Marxist sentiments of oppression, marginalisation and inequality within his lyrical protest against the establishment. Ginsberg's challenge of authority and social conformity is revealed through his vulgar disregard for _'vapid innocuous euphemism'_, and Howl's 1957 successful challenge of the Californian judiciary system, where it was tried for obscenity but ultimately deemed to have _'redeeming social importance'_[1]. His raw honesty serves to create an incredibly personal voice that successfully protests the American, capitalist status quo. However, Howl may also be considered a poem conditioned by society: it is deeply rooted in Ginsberg's own experience - obscene and reflective of the time. In this regard, it may be argued that the poet fails to challenge his capitalist era and status quo, and is unsuccessful in creating a distinguishably individual voice.

Central to Marxist philosophy is the idea that poets and writers must _'stand apart and see the faults of society'_[2]. This ideology is visible in Ginsberg's powerful rejection of Capitalist America's conformities, discernible through his extreme, graphic language. In part one, the poem depicts a crash in _'the negro streets at dawn'_ after an extreme high, contrasting the euphoria of _'the starry dynamo'_ with the dysphoria of _'starving'_ hysteria, forcing us to face a dissatisfactory reality. The explicit depictions of homosexual and heterosexual sex with men _'who let themselves be fucked in the ass'_ suggest (given the prevailing societal beliefs on sexuality and homosexual relations at the time) passive acceptance of the hellish chaos Capitalism has wreaked - this sharply contrasts Ginsberg's tone of rebellion, serving to highlight the need of his protest. The opening lines act as an exposition, presenting a suffering America where men _'purgatoried their torsos night after night'_ - the raw, anguished verb _'purgatoried'_ and the repetition of _'night'_ introduce victims of _'the narcotic tobacco haze of Capitalism'_, emphasising the eternal, torturous existence the state has induced. Ginsberg's merger of base, obscene lexis in crude imagery of men _'who howled on their knees… waving genitals and manuscripts'_, with the art of poetry, a form with nuances and allusions often reserved for higher classes, is ironic, but also serves to transcend societal boundaries and challenge accepted conventions - he gives an unprecedented voice to the marginalised and oppressed. However some critics and public members, such as Gail Potter, a radio personality and witness, who stated that when reading the poem _'you feel like you are going through the gutter'_[3], still see the lexis of Howl as evidence for its lack of literary merit and social importance. However the value of canonical texts can be judged by their language: _'writers do not simply choose 'ordinary' words… but words which have resonance… beauty or 'rightness' for the… context'_[4]. This appears to be Ginsberg's primary achievement in the opening: he depicts a _'gutter'_-like state in need of examination, rejecting Capitalism's conformities. His ability to create a voice that sparked such controversy suggests that Howl was successful in challenging the status quo.

Ironically, it may also be argued that Ginsberg doesn't break from conventional norms in his form and style, as he chose to mimic the accepted literary style of Walt Whitman's _'Leaves of Grass'_, suggesting he is unable to _'stand apart'_ as a true Marxist should. However this knowing use of an established poetical style is perhaps more clever than critics give him credit for. His conformity to a respected form is evident; the structural length of lines and address of unconventional topics in _'who blew and were blown by those human seraphim, the sailors, caresses of Atlantic and Caribbean love'_, is mirrored from Whitman's poetry - _'And parted the shirt from my bosom-bone, and plunged your tongue to my bare-stript heart'_[5] - from Song of Myself. Both use free verse, perhaps as an expression of nonconformity, and create vivid images of sexual intimacy and spirituality. David Kirk of the University of San Francisco stated that Howl lacked literary merit because of this, calling it a _'weak imitation'_ that failed to replicate _'the value of the original'_[6]. As such, Ginsberg does not challenge the status quo because his work addresses topics the same way they were addressed a century ago; he brings nothing authentic to the literary canon, instead conforming to the accepted constraints of literature, despite the unconventional style he chooses to mimic. Yet Howl's mimicry of Leaves of Grass includes fundamental differences; Ginsberg's ability to manipulate the style in order to support his protest of capitalism is key in highlighting his argument. One example is Whitman's _'I give the sign of Democracy.'_ which exemplifies the differences between both writers: Whitman idealises American democracy, whereas Ginsberg denounces the oppressive, capitalist state is has become. Hence, Ginsberg's writing cannot simply be an _'imitation'_ of Whitman's work. It is furthermore difficult to agree with Kirk's point because great literature is arguably always the result of external influences. Whitman himself heavily admired Ralph Waldo Emerson, and so perhaps it may be argued that his poetry was also simply an _'imitation'_. Kirk's resistance to adding Howl to the cannon may be suggestive of the very class disparity Ginsberg resents as Eagleton suggests _'texts become canonical… because they serve to support the ruling ideology'_[7] rather than rebel as Ginsberg has chosen to do. In addition, an important _'Marxist practice is to relate the literary work to the social assumptions of the time in which it is 'consumed''_[8], and as such, there can be no attempt to separate Ginsberg from his influences. This is the case for all writers, for it is only by responding and understanding the works and knowledge of others, that they are capable of devising something entirely novel, individual, and able to challenge the status quo.

Ginsberg continues to defy the status quo through his unique voice of dissent, made explicit through the language and syntax in part two of the poem where his purpose appears to be to bemoan the state of industrial civilisation, in line with the Marxist thought that _'the capitalist mode of production generates a worldview… all of us function as objects and become alienated from ourselves'_[9]. Here, Ginsberg undermines the prevailing social and economic systems of post-war America with fierce, impassioned exclamatives: _'Moloch! Solitude! Filth! Ugliness!… Nightmare of Moloch!'_. The _'idea of class struggle is central'_ and _'the connections between literature and the economic structure of society… is made evident'_[10] through _'Moloch'_, a Canaanite fire-god to whom children were sacrificed. In the poem's context, this image appears symbolic of the hegemony and power Ginsberg resents. The punctuation and base repetition of _'Moloch!'_ create a feeling of entrapment, leaving us unable to escape Howl's broken world. The further personification of _'Moloch whose eyes are a thousand blind windows'_ gives the deity omnipotence, as though capitalism has seeped into _'the mind'_ of society, poisoning the system from within. This is developed with contrasts such as _'Moloch's'_ spiritual _'soul'_ and _'love'_ yearning for material commodities, _'oil… stone… electricity… banks'_, as well as references to a generation of _'Boys sobbing in armies!'_ - men who witnessed World War Two. The juxtaposition between youthful _'boys'_ and mature _'armies'_ emphasises the chaos induced by the state Ginsberg bemoans. The syntax also changes dramatically - short phrases punctuated by caesura and exclamations contrast the long Whitman style of part one, re-emphasising Ginsberg's personal passion and defiance to authority. The juxtaposition of the vulgar _'Cocksucker in Moloch!'_ with heavenly illusions of freedom as _'I dream Angels!'_ highlight Ginsberg's choice of vocabulary as radical and unyielding in its candor, and we are struck by the poet's decision to bare his soul so sincerely through his writing _'I thought I wouldn't write a poem, but just write what I wanted to without fear… Let my imagination go… scribble magic lines from my real mind'_ [11]. Ginsberg's honesty provides a perspective that doesn't conform to the traditionally accepted.

Ginsberg challenges the conformity of society further in his final, personal address to Carl Solomon in part three, where his voice of opposition protests the Marxist sentiment that _'minds aren't free at all'_, by attempting to _'free'_ himself from the _'tobacco haze'_. Solomon's depiction _'where fifty more shocks will never return your soul to its body'_ reveal a prisoner of the Capitalist society Ginsberg condemns. Ginsberg never intended for Howl to be published, which explains the intimacy of his lexis in the opening _'Carl Solomon! I'm with you in Rockland'_. Paradoxically, this final part also seems to address a wider audience, as _'Carl Solomon'_ is a symbol for all marginalised and oppressed, emphasised by the repetition of the pronouns _'I'_, _'you'_, and _'we'_. Ginsberg uses the collective oppressed status as a force for creativity and innovation, forging an individual voice out of suffering. However, the naming of a saviour from _'Moloch'_ is bittersweet, as Solomon remains tragically stuck within the system. This entrapment is exemplified by the tangible distance between Ginsberg and Solomon, depicting both as victims and bringing into question the poet's liberty and individuality; although Ginsberg is free to express his ideas that _'the United States… coughs all night and won't let us sleep'_, he remains enslaved to a society he resents, supporting Foucault's view that _'literary texts are really empty texts'_, where he questions the _'notion that the writer is totally in control of what is written'_[12]. Nevertheless, the prevailing sentiment in Ginsberg's final section is a call for strength, honesty and freedom, fulfilling his belief that the role of the poet is _'to make the private world public'_. It is an emotive reflection of the American people's voice. Carl Solomon acts as a metaphor to express the failures of society, but the serene ending depicts the strength of individuals despite this: _'In my dreams you walk… across America in tears to the door of my cottage in the Western night'_ reveals a man possibly defeated by the living hell he is trapped in, moulded to become a product of society, but more likely, an individual creating a personal howl of defiance, challenging the status quo of the world around him.

In conclusion, whilst it may initially seem that Howl's obscenity and mimicry of Whitman's style undermine its ability to successfully challenge the status quo, the outcome of the trial and the poem's lasting impact on society would suggest otherwise. Ginsberg's personal values of freedom and honesty are prevalent throughout, allowing him to critique and challenge the socially accepted from a position of integrity and moral authority. His further denouncement of the American hegemony and class disparity, and open exploration of otherwise distasteful topics confirm his ability to create a personal voice of dissent and protest. As an individual, the poet's bold choice of style and lexis paved the way for all literature that followed. In Howl, Ginsberg manages to give power to the oppressed and marginalised, in an entirely lyrical and eloquent manner. Ultimately, the authorial methods, choice of subject, and creation of something wholly personal lends itself to a successful challenge of the status quo.

### Bibliography

Ginsberg, Allen. Howl, Kaddish and Other Poems (2009) , Penguin Modern Classics

Rehlaender, Jamie L. A Howl of Free Expression: the 1957 Howl Obscenity Trial and Sexual Liberation (2015)

Montgomery, M. et al. Ways of Reading: Advanced Reading Skills for Students of English Literature (2000)

Barry, P. Beginning Theory (2002) 2nd ed., Manchester: Manchester University Press

Peck, J. and Coyle, M. Literary Terms and Critisicms (1994) Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan

Whitman, Walt. Leaves of Grass (1855) , Penguin Classics

Transcript of People of the State of California vs. Lawrence Ferlinghetti (1957) (http://www.dhs.fjanosco.net/Documents/HowlOnTrial.pdf)

Bertens, H. Literary Theory: The Basics (2001), Abingdon: Routeledge

Ginsberg, Allen. The New American Poetry 1945–1960 edited by Allen, Donald. (1999), University of California Press

Epstein, Rob and Friedman, Jefferey. Howl (2010)

[1] Transcript of People of the State of California vs. Lawrence Ferlinghetti (1957)

[2] Peck, J. and Coyle, M. Literary Terms and Critisicms (1994) Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan

[3] Rehlaender, Jamie L. A Howl of Free Expression: the 1957 Howl Obscenity Trial and Sexual Liberation (2015)

[4] Montgomery, M. et al. Ways of Reading: Advanced Reading Skills for Students of English Literature (2000)

[5] Whitman, Walt. Leaves of Grass (1855) , Penguin Classics

[6] ibid

[7] ibid

[8] Barry, P. Beginning Theory (2002) 2nd ed., Manchester: Manchester University Press

[9] Bertens, H. Literary Theory: The Basics (2001), Abingdon: Routeledge

[10] Ibid

[11] Ginsberg, Allen. The New American Poetry 1945–1960 edited by Allen, Donald. (1999), University of California Press

[12] ibid
